one of the most unusual deadly animal
encounters I've ever had was right here
in Sydney it was just off Manley Harbour
and it was with what is one of the most
venomous creatures in the whole world
but something that is utterly innocuous
something that you would never ever spot
unless you are really really looking for
it it's called a blue ringed octopus now
they are much much smaller than you
would imagine
even a fully grown adult blue ringed
octopus is smaller than a ping pong ball
and they have remarkable cryptic that is
camouflage coloration they have the
ability as with so many animals in their
group the octopus is squid and
cuttlefish not just to be able to change
their color but to be able to change the
entire texture of their skin and to be
able to change their their whole body
shape to blend in with their environment
so the blue ringed octopus can take on
any color from sort of white through to
very very dark brown pucker its skin up
into wrinkles and make itself look like
whatever it is it's sitting on so I went
out with three other guys and we were
free diving that is diving just purely
on breath-hold not using scuba gear just
going around looking into bottles and
cracks and crevices and underneath rocks
looking for this incredibly beautiful
tiny creature eventually I wish I could
say I've found it myself but that would
be a lie one of the other guys found
this tiny little octopus and brought it
up in a small aquarium so that we can
look at it on dry land the blue ringed
octopus is so named because it has flash
colors which are some of the most
dramatic you will ever see in the whole
natural world these flash colors are
used presumably to to intimidate a foe
to scare away a predator that might want
to be feasting on a blue ringed octopus
and all of a sudden you'll go from a
very drab early colored animal something
that could just be a kind of lemon
yellow to something that has the most
extraordinary neon blue and black lined
colors that just pop up all over its
body and they are like something you'd
expect to see in a neon nightclub rather
than on a time
animal like this but of course the
reason that we were thinking about
putting these animals on the Debbie 60
was not down to their Flash colors it
was down to their venom now like all of
the animals in this group there called
the settle points on the head footed
animals they have a hard because the
center of their arms which they can use
to envenomate their prey so they will
actually nibble into the hard shell of
something like a crab and dribble venom
all over it which dissolves the soft
parts underneath the shell there's venom
is is so strong that even on a tiny
little octopus it is enough to overcome
a human being people are very very
rarely hurt and it's always if they've
been deliberately handling a blue ringed
octopus but the venom is said to be
totally painless and nobody knows that
they've been bitten and all of a sudden
their heart and their lungs just start
to shut down and the only way that you
can really save someone who's been
bitten by buried octopus is just to
ventilate them for as much as 24 hours
until the venom leaves their system it's
extraordinary that an animal that is
smaller than a ping pong ball has the
power to completely overcome an animal
as large as me but for me the reason
that it should go on the deadly 60 is
not that it's not because of its dangers
human beings it's because it has the
power to dissolve the shell of a crab
and munch bites inside
I think that's utterly fascinating and
there's no doubt that one of the most
beautiful creatures we've ever featured
on the deadly 60